This class represents a type of mutation with a particular distribution of fitness effects, such as
neutral mutations or weakly beneficial mutations. Sections 1.5.3 and 1.5.4 present an overview of
the conceptual role of this class. The mutation types currently defined in the simulation are
defined as global constants with the same names used in the SLiM input file – m1, m2, and so forth.
There are currently six options for the distribution of fitness effects in SLiM, represented by
single-character codes:
"f" – A fixed fitness effect. This DFE type has a single parameter, the selection coefficient s to
be used by all mutations of the mutation type.
"g" – A gamma-distributed fitness effect. This DFE type is specified by two parameters, a mean
value and a shape parameter. The gamma distribution from which mutations are drawn is given by
the probability density function P(s | α,β) = [Γ(α)βα]−1sα−1exp(−s/β), where α is the shape parameter,
TOC I TOC II WF nonWF initialize() Community Genome Individual LogFile Mutation Species Subpopulation
events mutationEffect() interaction() mateChoice() modifyChild() mutation() recombination() reproduction() survival() 705
and the specified mean for the distribution is equal to αβ. Note that this parameterization is the
same as for the Eidos function rgamma(). A gamma distribution is often used to model deleterious
mutations at functional sites.
"e" – An exponentially-distributed fitness effect. This DFE type is specified by a single
parameter, the mean of the distribution. The exponential distribution from which mutations are
drawn is given by the probability density function P(s | β) = β−1exp(−s/β), where β is the specified
mean for the distribution. This parameterization is the same as for the Eidos function rexp(). An
exponential distribution is often used to model beneficial mutations.
"n" – A normally-distributed fitness effect. This DFE type is specified by two parameters, a
mean and a standard deviation. The normal distribution from which mutations are drawn is given
by the probability density function P(s | μ,σ) = (2πσ2)−1/2exp(−(s−μ)2/2σ2), where μ is the mean and σ
is the standard deviation. This parameterization is the same as for the Eidos function rnorm(). A
normal distribution is often used to model mutations that can be either beneficial or deleterious,
since both tails of the distribution are unbounded.
"p" – A Laplace-distributed fitness effect. This DFE type is specified by two parameters, a mean
and a scale. The Laplace distribution from which mutations are drawn is given by the probability
density function P(s | μ,b) = exp(−|s−μ|/b)/2b, where μ is the mean and b is the scale parameter. A
Laplace distribution is sometimes used to model a mix of both deleterious and beneficial
mutations.
"w" – A Weibull-distributed fitness effect. This DFE type is specified by a scale parameter and a
shape parameter. The Weibull distribution from which mutations are drawn is given by the
probability density function P(s | λ,k) = (k/λk)sk−1exp(−(s/λ)k), where λ is the scale parameter and k is
the shape parameter. This parameterization is the same as for the Eidos function rweibull(). A
Weibull distribution is often used to model mutations following extreme-value theory.
"s" – A script-based fitness effect. This DFE type is specified by a script parameter of type
string, specifying an Eidos script to be executed to produce each new selection coefficient. For
example, the script "return rbinom(1);" could be used to generate selection coefficients drawn
from a binomial distribution, using the Eidos function rbinom(), even though that mutational
distribution is not supported by SLiM directly. The script must return a singleton float or integer.
Note that these distributions can in principle produce selection coefficients smaller than -1.0.
In that case, the mutations will be evaluated as “lethal” by SLiM, and the relative fitness of the
individual will be set to 0.0.